Good morning and welcome to the Social
Services Community Select Committee.
Uh, so look, I've wanted to take an opportunity to, um,
introduce yourself and your team,
and then, um, some opening comments on understanding
of a PowerPoint presentation that your team, uh, has
to, uh, present to us.
And once we've moved through that,
we'll move the questions from there. Sure.
Um, thank you very much, chair.
Um, look, my name is Andrew Bridgeman
and I'm the acting Chief Executive of
and, um, Venicia Smith here,
who's the Deputy P Chief Executive of Commissioning
and Investment, um,
and Jesse Roth, um, who, uh, is, um,
works in the commissioning, um,
and investment group, um, who's been intricately involved
with, um, with the processes.
Um, but what I thought I'd do is just, uh, start
with some brief opening remarks, um, that kind
of look at the past probably,
and then hand over to Benicia to give, uh, an in-depth sort
of PowerPoint that I think will explain where we want to go
to, um, partly a result, a result of the OAG report.
So really to try to give the select committee confidence
that we've heard them, uh, we acknowledge the issues
and we want to do something about it.
I think that's the, the critical thing here.
Um, so look firstly, um, uh, to reiterate
that we accept the findings from Deloitte
and, uh, um, Ernest and Young
and the Auditor General reports.
Um, and we want to continue to strengthen how we work
with our partners to support the needs
of Tamika and children.
So that's kind of a clear, um, uh, platform.
Uh, our focus is firmly on insurance services are in place
for those we are responsible for supporting.
Our role is to make sure Tam and anthi
and hanau have what they need to feel safe,
nurtured, and to flourish.
Um, and we always obviously do this within
the context of a budget.
Um, so we are probably no different to health
and other big systems.
Um, ultimately, um, things get rationed
because you're working with unlimited,
probably demand and limited supply.
Um, we are committed to changes needed
to improve the procurement process,
and you'll hear about that very, very shortly.
Um, I think it's important to note that
before the RIG inquiry commenced, we had Aang,
tamari had already instigated, um, an an internal review,
um, which was undertaken by Ernest and Young
because we were worried about the feedback
that we were getting in that, uh, process.
Based on those findings, we had already begun
to make changes, including creating a new leadership role
to enable a dedicated focus on procurement,
improving provider engagement and refining internal systems.
And that's the role that Benicia has taken on.
Um, look, we want to acknowledge that our past communication
and engagement with providers was inconsistent
and in some instances inadequate.
So we just wanna put that on the table.
We are taking more time and care with decisions
and strengthening how we communicate
and engage, um, with our partners and providers.
And again, you'll get a good sense of that from Isha.
Um, we know that trusted transparent relationships are
critical to success,
and we are really intending to build on that.
Um, I want to acknowledge to all providers, sorry,
I have acknowledged to all providers,
and I've written to those providers,
the deficiencies in our engagement during 24 25, um,
the contracting round and the communication that providers
and staff were provided wasn't adequate.
So I just wanna let you know I've done that in writing
and also I've done that in a number of forums, um, uh, um,
media forums, um,
and then has made changes to my, um, second tier
and organization as a result of that to make sure
that we have the right focus
and heft on, on, uh, on,
on commissioning and investment.
Um, so, um, I probably just really wanna summarize
by saying that, um, we want to ensure that the services
that we provide are effective, equitable,
and delivered in a way that makes the Graves
needs times change.
And so do the needs of the families.
And that's one of the tricky things with this, is that
contracting is never set forever.
It really depends on
what are the children need at any one time.
Uh, we know we have legacy programs
and initiatives that are no longer fit for purpose, uh,
and that ministerial priorities
and organizational objectives change over time.
So contracting needs to reflect that.
Our improvements and procurement are about focusing our core
role on our core role in ensuring the right support in place
for those that need it most.
So look, I'm just gonna leave it at that
and then hand over to Benicia to talk about, um, uh,
the way forward and what we are doing now
to address those issues outta the ig. Thank you. Thank you,
Thank you.
Anyways, uh, we,
we will have from the presentation go questions afternoon,
so questions after the entire presentation?
Yeah, yeah. Not as she's on. Okay. Thank you.
Just getting to,
Uh, Tina Koto.
So, um, we're gonna get into the presentation
that you've got in your pack with a bit more detail.
Um, there's probably four key things I would say
before I get into the presentation.
The first thing is that, um,
uh, public trust and confidence, um, in the commissioning
and investment function, um, uh, um,
uh, needs to be rebuilt
and kind of recognize that that takes time.
It's a journey, um, to do that.
And that's what this plan, um, is underpinned by, is about
rebuilding trust and confidence.
The second thing I would say is, um,
and building trust and confidence.
You need to be really clear around what your approach is,
your processes and timeframes.
And so we have an approach
that is best based on best practice, uh, domestically
and internationally that we need to be transparent about,
have timeframes, um, and we'll talk a bit about that.
Uh, the third thing is, um, in order to deliver that,
we need good internal systems
and processes that are operating efficiently
and effectively, which includes, um, our staff, uh,
clearly understanding their core roles and responsibilities
and having clear communications.
And again, we'll talk about that.
And then the fourth thing is
that this plan has been predicated on ensuring
that we are responding to, uh, the reviews
that have been undertaken of order order.
So particularly the Deloits s Young
and the orders general report.
Thank you. We we're just having a little issue
with the clerks and trying to get the presentation online
so members have in front of 'em.
And if you want to work through while we try
and resolve that technical issue.
Okay. So, um,
we have developed a proposed plan.
It is proposed because we are currently engaging across the
motu, um, and seeking feedback.
It is centered on four key programs,
fixing 24, 25, refreshing our approach,
uh, resetting, um,
and refining how we undertake services,
rejuvenating outcomes and engagement approach.
And as I said, it's about, um, being underpinned
by the reviews that have been undertaken.
Now, the first program of work, um, is, has been a,
a core focus for Orang since I arrived in March,
which has been looking at what happened in 24, 25,
and making sure that we understand
what contracts were in place,
what contract variations were in place or not in place.
Mm-hmm. So, so, um, in March there was about a hundred
contract variations that were outstanding,
and we spent, uh, a good couple of months getting
that sorted, uh, so that by the end of the financial year,
all 554 providers, um, had contracts in place.
Um, and, um, yeah, so that's the first thing.
The second thing that we, uh, spent quite a bit
of time on also was, uh, making sure that, um,
the minister's announcement, which was in January this year
around extending any contracts
or services that ended on the 30th of June, 2025,
were extended for six months.
We identified that there were 194 providers,
and, um, by the end of 30 June, 2025,
all of those contract sections were out.
And I think about 180 of them were back.
We were waiting for about 15,
and that's the first time in seven years
that we've ever had one a year actually in place
and contracts in place before the financial year actually
starts the, the year of, of delivery.
Um, do we, where would you like,
um, Clarkson to take you to?
Oh, Jenny. Yeah, Jim, we're on prop one.
So, um, yeah, so when I think about the checklist
of the kind of four kind of key things around the reviews,
um, that have come up,
and it's around making sure we've got strategic procurement
and planning errors based decision making,
contract management and relationship secret
and governance program.
One has been focused in on making sure our contract
management and relationship integrity is being focused on.
Um, and I needed to do that so that we could get into, uh,
this financial year with a clean slate
from a contract management perspective.
Program two, um,
is about resetting our, um, approach.
Now, as I said
before, um,
this approach is actually based on best
practice, um, in New Zealand.
So NSD follow a very similar process.
So does SAA education, corrections justice,
um, and internationally, um, in Australia, Canada
and uk, they, they're very similar kind
of social commissioning approaches, uh, going through kind
of these broadly five steps.
Unfortunately, um, we hadn't been using the steps, um, at,
um, in a coherent and consistent way.
We had at times missteps
and other times we'd significantly compressed them.
So, um,
and this whole process really does start
with assessing regional needs
and understanding in the regions what our children,
young people and whanau need, um,
that have come to our attention.
And making sure that the investments, uh, um,
purpose in a way that meets the, the regional needs.
So we need to go through that process.
Um, we need to then, once we've undertaken
that needs analysis, then go through a process
of understanding what services, uh, should continue,
what services need to be, uh, decommissioned
and repurposed, um,
and what services are not required anymore.
And we need to do that regularly because needs do change.
Um, and you know, an example of that is, um, in Auckland,
um, we we're investing in quite a few programs
around teen parenting.
The numbers around teen parenting has significantly
decreased over the last, you know, five years.
So we have decommissioned those programs
and reinvested that money in other services,
uh, in the Auckland region.
And we need to be doing that regularly
because needs in the regions do change.
So that's what we need to be doing.
We also need to be thinking about, um, um,
if there are new services required, um,
and what procurement process we need to go
through and how do we source.
Now, when I think about these steps, steps one
to three really should be started 15 months
prior to the year that you're going
to start delivering the services at a minimum.
I have had some feedback already from regional engagement.
Um, and a worry is about step three in particular,
which is the sourcing providers
and negotiating contracts,
particularly when it's new services
and new money is required.
And it's due to the conundrum
of the cap of the budget process.
Obviously the budget process happens, um,
and decisions are made basically the second Monday of April,
uh, budget sensitive until budget day.
That means I wouldn't be able to start a,
if I had been successful in the budget process
procurement until after May.
Um, and so the timeframe
of delivering services from one July for new services
and new funding doesn't work.
Um, so I think we'd had to change the timeframe for that
and, and look at undertaking a procurement process
and possibly having services, um,
delivered from maybe one February to kind
of leave about six months to go
through the procurement process and,
and negotiate the contracts.
So it's just something that I need to reflect, um, uh,
in the, in, in this, um, approach
as a result of regional engagement.
The other comment from regional engagement to date has been
around, there's two other kind of key co components for you
to know is on step one, uh,
there's been discussion about having more time
for regional needs assessment, uh, possibly starting
that kind of March-ish, you know, maybe late February.
And then the third broad comment to date, um,
is thinking about, um, what is the key, um,
principles that underpin the approach around transparency,
those types of making them very clear and and transparent.
Um, and, um,
and also being really clear about
what are the core priorities.
Um, so, um, that's just an update of this core.
So that's kind of the steps, uh, that we need to undertake.
Um, and, um, I think kind of moving on to program two,
program two, um, is all about refreshing our approach.
We've got kind of a weird year this year for 25, 26.
It's a bit weird because
of the 194 contracts have only been, um, extended
for six months, which is, um, uh,
so that means we need to work out what happens
for the next six months.
Um, we have to report back to cabinet on that,
and they'd like us to report back in August.
So after regional engagement on what our proposed, uh,
strategic approaches to commissioning, uh,
what our funding requirements are beyond 31 December,
uh, are they, uh, do we want to decommission anything?
And if so, fully
or partially, I can tell you right now it won't be
fully 'cause we've done six months.
Um, and I think the other thing, uh, they want us
to come back to them on is any services
or programs that might be proposed for transition to, uh,
the social investment agency, um, more broadly.
If I was undertaking that approach that I've just outlined,
the five steps, it would mean, um, uh,
earlier this year, kind of in March, April, may,
we would've been, um, undertaking, uh,
regional engagement to discuss regional needs.
We'd be analyzing them, kind of going through step two,
the end of step two.
I'm proposing that we would report, uh, back
to the minister in about November of a year to kind
of say the year ahead.
This is what it's looking like.
We've identified that these are the regional needs,
these are the services that need to continue.
These are the services that we think need
to be decommissioned and repurposed that, uh, investment
and, and these services, uh, need to be decommissioned
and let's work on a exit and develop an exit
and a transition plan, uh, with those providers
around, uh, what that means.
Um, and so in relation to program two, there's a range
of things that, you know, we need to focus our attention on.
Again, going back to the reviews, we need to be making sure
that we are making strategic procurement, um, uh, decisions.
So that needs to be based on our approach,
what our priorities and strategy is.
Uh, we need to be making sure that we have a plan
and that it's transparent, that people understand
what the plan is, just kind
of why the five steps in a proposed timeframe so
that organizations, our partners
and providers can kind of plan for it.
Uh, and we need, it needs
to be evidence-based decision making.
So again, that's why we need, uh, good data and information
and our regional needs assessment undertaken,
have good contract management, um, practices in place
and making sure that we are, uh, continuing to engage
and, um, uh, and, and rebuilding trust and,
and, and confidence.
And we need to have good kind
of internal governance arrangements
in order to make this happen.
So that's kind of program two, program three
is around how we do things internally.
And there's a, a range of things that we need
to be focusing our attention on.
We need to be, um, thinking about our contract framework.
We currently utilize the MB social sector contract
framework, but we've made a number of modifications to it,
so of our colleagues at other social sector agencies,
and we need to be looking at terms and conditions
and seeing what we can do to be, um, more consistent with,
um, other agencies.
And if we're being different, outlining very clearly
our rationale for why we have different terms
and conditions, which is not clear at the moment.
Uh, we also need to be thinking about our contract rotation.
So we have 554 providers
that provide over 700 services in a year,
across three years.
We, uh, look at a third of them.
So about 170 ish I can add, yeah,
ish a year.
And, um, but currently there's no rationale
for why it's that 170.
It's not done by services, it's not done by program,
or it's not done by region.
So we need to realign our rotation process.
If you were looking at needs within a region
and services, um, you know, across a couple of regions,
you'd want to make sure that your
contract rotation was aligned.
And currently it's not.
So that's gonna take a bit of time to kind of unpick,
but it is something we need to focus our attention on,
and we need to significantly step up our game
around data collection and reporting.
In many instances, we have, um, you know,
outcome agreements,
but they have output measures.
So they do things like, count the number of beds
and ask us about your utilization rates.
And that's the wrong question.
I mean, I do want to know that they have 17 beds,
but I actually want to know about what's happening
with the 17 tiki that have been in those beds.
Are they warmer? Uh, now that they're warmer
and they're eating, that means that they might be going
to school, that they've been to the doctor,
that they've had a dentist appointment.
That's the data that I want in addition to
the very output things.
So we don't ask the right questions.
And, um, set in my original engagement today,
actually, I be sure the questions you have that you,
you know, that or, or actually answers that you want
to be giving us, and we are just not letting you.
So let's look at how we can improve our data collection.
We also do collect quite a lot of data
and we don't share it.
So there are other agencies, um, that I've looked at.
Um, if I just look at my colleagues actually at the Ministry
of Justice, they do this great dashboard report back,
I'd like us to move into doing some of
that dashboard reporting so that providers can see,
you know, the data that's coming in, see what it's saying.
We currently don't do that, um, kind of at a regional level
or at a, um,
or at a national level regularly, or if at all.
So I kind of wanna get into that type of reporting also.
Um, so, uh, I think the other thing, uh,
that I wanna make sure internally is
that we've got good guidance and support,
and that we have, um, we're really clear around
our internal processes and that we are being efficient.
We're not having a process that has
slightly exaggerating 57 steps.
I kind of know that things need to be cut out.
Um, so that's kind
of program three, oh, I'm going through this quickly.
Program four, um, is, um,
around rejuvenating our comms and engagement.
So we kind of went through a period
where we didn't communicate
and engage well from national office,
and we, uh, need to change that.
So one of the things is around, um, setting up our provider.
So since I've been back on board, we've done three, um,
that provide a range of information
and respond to questions that have been raised.
Um, and I want to do that more regularly.
Um, we're also doing regional engagement.
So to date, we've had 12 of 21.
We've also had engagement with strategic partners through,
uh, national providers
and with the, so
through the Social Services Providers association.
Uh, and you're just wanting to do more of that.
I, in the plan, I'm proposing at least two times in a year
that would be coming out that does not in any way take away
from the ongoing regular engagement that I expect
to be happening at the regional level.
Um, and, and maintaining, um, those relationships
and making sure that they're healthy.
I wanna have a look at, you know,
whether we should think about some online hui,
because my regional engagement is probably gonna
be in quarters one and three.
So to date. And actually this is as a result
of engagement today, they said you should do online
engagement benicia, and in quarter two and four.
And I'm very open to doing that.
They also have suggested I'm like, yes, we can make sure
that it happens, is that we are using, um,
current communication channels.
So SSPA is a good, a top pay order.
They have a great online facility.
Um, Belinda, the chief executive said, yes, Carpay,
you can utilize that.
Um, but if there are other communication channels
that are trusted, then I want to make sure that we are, um,
uh, using those instead of setting up new channels.
So this is all around our contract management
and relationship integrity.
Um, and kind of the next slide, uh,
basically outlines kind of a four year horizon around,
um, this process and kind of implementing, um,
or resetting the commissioning and investment function.
What you'll see kind of in out years is
that if the commissioning approach that step one
to five is work is operating optimally, that we would be,
um, working on two years simultaneously
within a financial year.
But we would back at the beginning of, you know,
15 months ahead.
And we'd be kind of at the end of, um, another one,
which I mean is we would be, um, uh, delivering services,
monitoring, you know, those types of things.
Um, you'll
however, see that this year, so the calendar year of 2025,
we are actually going to have, um, three years running.
Uh, yeah.
And it's 'cause we are still dealing, you know,
we've been dealing with 24, 25.
Yes. We're also dealing with 25, 26.
And in my regional engagement,
I have commenced regional needs assessment mahi with them,
um, at the regional Hui.
So we've started 26, 27.
So the first corridor all is happening in the regions around
what data is needed in order to, um,
and what is the data saying, uh, so that we can then, uh,
come back to them in kind of October going, this is
what we think the regional needs needs assessment
says and test it.
So that's kind of the program of work.
Um, there's, uh, the stars indicate kinda report backs
to kind of minister's cabinet, uh, processes.
Um, but I feel like there's a, a real opportunity, uh,
to build on, uh, the recommendations from the reviews, um,
to build back trust
and confidence to regularize, um, the commissioning
and investment approach and way it operates
because it can be regularized.
Um, um,
but it is underpinned though by making sure
that we understand what is required in the regions.
And we're taking both a regional approach, assessing needs,
looking at is our investment in the right places
and making adjustments when we need to,
and just being really transparent about that.
Um, but in a way that we, uh,
making sure that the, the social sector,
the NGO social sector is coming along with us.
Mm-hmm. So shorter.
Well, thank you very much. Um, KA put
A hand up first.
Thank you very much, um, for that.
There's some good stuff happening. Um, we appreciate it.
Um, I just wanna start with, um, the auditor general's
findings, that statement that quote,
some providers have been able
to accumulate significant surpluses,
and this is unacceptable end quote,
and other media releases was not based on sound evidence,
unfairly harmed providers
and undermined trust in the agency.
Uh, you opened by saying, um,
I think you said you accept the findings of the report.
So does Oranga TAM stand by that public statement today?
Well, I think what we've acknowledged is that, um,
and this is what this process is about,
we acknowledge the Iigs findings.
Um, we acknowledge that, um, we've got more work
to do when we kind of look at the balance sheet when an
organization, for instance, when they have under
underspends, um, to find out, um, exactly what is the nature
of those underspends and why have they occurred.
I mean, our critical interest is if
if we were funding an organization, whatever,
it's a hundred thousand to deliver to 10 tamari, um,
and there was an underspend, did that mean
because they're only delivering to six tamari, which means
what do we do about, you know, that,
that that that sort of gap.
So, and it's, uh, I think going forward with the time
that we're talking about, you know, so that kind
of 15 month period, um, that we are looking at, um,
that will also mean that we'll get involved.
You know, I think it'll be a much more of a conversation.
I think the critical thing is that we want a fund
for services that are provided
and for whatever reason, if those services aren't provided,
because there's not the demand, where is the demand in
that region to reallocate the could.
The flip side of that though,
is there'll be times when the demand exceeds.
So we've gotta be nimble enough to say, you know,
if we've projected a certain demand over the year
that demand exceeds in the first six months,
what do we do then about if we can,
addressing that increase in demand?
And I'm not saying we guaranteed to do it because again,
but like the health system, you've, you're kind
of rationed in one sense, but,
but hopefully we'll have a much better understanding.
We can kind of, we can respond to that.
So I just had four quick supplementaries.
So has issued
or considered issuing a clarification
or retraction of its media release in light
of the oags findings?
And if not, why not?
Well, um, no.
I mean, at the end of the day, we've acknowledged the
findings, and to be frank, the, the, the, the,
the burning, the burning focus has been,
we've got, you know, we've got a, um, EY report,
we've got an OIG report
before the OIG report even came in, you know, I mean,
I've been in this job since mid of September, right?
Mm-hmm. So, you know, there is a problem,
clearly there is a problem.
What do we do about it?
And my analysis of it was we had, well, part
of it was we had a, a big, a group responsible
for two big areas, procurement and devolution.
Devolution is huge in another itself.
So I thought, okay, we're gonna split,
we're gonna split those groups.
I'll bring in someone that just primarily focuses on
procurement, and then I've asked Benicia, we need a plan,
and their plan needs to be rigorous enough
that addresses those issues out of OAG.
And, um, uh, um, uh, ey,
I've, I've acknowledged our acceptance
of the IIG recommendations, um, in, in Hui face to face
and on Zoom hui to literally hundreds of people.
And I've acknowledged it by leader.
So that's, that's just been, that's been the focus.
Thank you. Um, so just following through, through on that,
um, I will just read the quote that came from
that press release or that media, um, release.
It was from, in previous years,
some providers have been able
to accumulate significant surpluses,
and this is unacceptable.
Every cent of funding we give providers needs
to be reaching the children
and young people for which it was intended not sitting idle
in the individual bank accounts.
So, can officials explain what analysis supported this claim
that provided surpluses were unacceptable?
And was any engagement actually undertaken
with those affected providers
before that judgment was made public?
Well, I'll, I'll do the first part,
perhaps Jesse, do the second part.
I mean, it was, you know, really based on, um, you know,
that first part is quite legitimate, isn't it?
I mean, at the end of the day, we, we,
we are providing people money to deliver a service.
So our role, and,
and you have a, as interest in this as we do, is
that money doesn't sit idle
and that it is, uh, delivering on the services that the,
there's nothing wrong with that.
But perhaps if, if you want to talk briefly about the,
what the rationale entail.
Sure. So, um, so very, uh, briefly, um,
you know, we did note some irregularities in the STEM
profile of the number of agencies
and significant accumulation of some surpluses.
Yeah. Uh, but we acknowledged that we didn't take the steps
to engage with those providers appropriately
to understand the issues, um,
contributing to those surpluses.
Thank you. Um, just two more.
Um, supplementaries, what processes are now in place
to ensure future communications during these sensitive
procurement processes are accurate, fair,
and do not generalize provider performance?
Because in that response, I was a bit concerned that yes,
you have stated that you accept the findings,
but then rereading the actual quote that was made,
you're sort of standing by that.
Um, and you would've read that, read it to, to show that
that surplus didn't necessarily come from funding.
So that is a bit concerning, but I do want to look forward
and see how we actually, um, accurately
and fairly, um, assess it
and not generalize the provider performance.
Yeah. So look, I, I will hand over to Isha to answer that,
but, but perhaps to start off with, look, absolutely agree.
Um, you know, each is an individual contract
and we've gotta focus specifically on the, the,
the issues facing the, the individual entity in terms
of the funding that's with them, their spend rate,
what they've left over, et cetera.
Um, so totally agree with that.
Um, but Anisha, in terms of going forward,
do you want to Mm,
I'd just probably emphasize that we are in the process
of resetting and that it's gonna take time
and it's why I'm out, um, in the TU talking directly
to providers and
that they're not just receiving a letter
from me or from Andrew.
And it's about rebuilding our relationships with them,
recognizing that many of them do have quite strong
relationships, uh, with our regional staff.
So it's, uh, reinforcing that
that relationship is still really key,
and that I'm gonna be working extra hard to make sure
that I'm communicating really well with my regional people
so that they have all of the right messages.
And, um, and Qs.
And as I've also indicated to providers
that if they've got issues,
they can just literally get in contact.
They've got my email address actually already had few emails
and kind of respond like, yes,
and I need to make sure I'm responding really timely.
But, um, and I've just said it will take time.
I, um, there might be times when, um, I'm not timely,
but I'm gonna tell you and I'm just gonna communicate.
I wanna make sure that we are just being transparent
and open as much as possible.
Thank you. And this is my last supplementary on this,
um, question here.
So given the minister has stood by her own, uh,
cash cow comments, is Ang Tamari concerned that continuing
to defend its own,
or, um, not wanting to retract its own
damning statements risks entrenching that distrust,
especially with providers whose task it is
to keep children safe and away from danger?
Look, I, I think there are two parts to this picture.
Um, and, you know, uh, the first part is, uh,
we've been quite with the, the Hui
that Isha was undertaking in the, the, the meetings
that we've had is to acknowledge what happened in the past,
uh, um, um,
and to acknowledge the kind of the processes
and the communications were not what they should have been.
Um, so we've been very, very clear about that.
Uh, and we've, and we wanted to do that
because until we did that, then, you know, you're not gonna,
you're not gonna, um, you're not gonna address everyone's
anxiety, but at least you're open about
it and honest about it.
And then the second step is what is the plan going forward?
So, um, my sense would be that, um, uh,
it's been, yep, last year was bruising.
Uh, people will still feel bruised,
but actually they're really focused on
what are you gonna do about it
and what does the next year look like?
And we've been really honest, um, about,
um, this is the plan.
We, we've got, we want to engage with you,
we want to get your feedback.
We, we, it's not gonna be perfect.
So there's, there's still gonna be noise.
You are still gonna get noise. Mm-hmm.
But we hoping the noise will be less, uh,
and it will be less, it will be less in volume
and less egregious in substance.
So, um, and we think these, uh,
people are responding to that positively.
Thank you, Ary, Helen.
Great. Thank you. Um, look,
I think I am hearing you clearly that you acknowledge that
that was not a good, uh, a kind of approach
to attack the organizations in that way,
and that you're be rebuilding trust.
And what I heard from Isha, which was really interesting,
was this issue about best practice from overseas
and also picking up the MB contract model.
But looking at where you needed to differ, if I am correct,
that you were trying to build a very different model.
No, no, no. I wouldn't say I'm building a different model.
It's just that all social sector agencies use that model.
And every single social sector
agency in the government Yeah.
Has modified it has, he has schedules.
So from a provider perspective,
there will be a provision about data
and reporting that says Apples from one agency
and says from another agencies
and says, chairs from another agency.
My role is to be joined up
and go, if we're gonna be outcomes focused,
maybe we should think about joining outcomes up across our
agencies to make the reporting more efficient.
So that's what I mean about re-looking at our contract.
Okay. I might have misunderstood,
but what I wanna know is when you talked about those
Australian and Canadian and UK models Yeah.
Um, I'm interested in what we can do
and how we should be looking at the work that we do
in terms of those models.
Are they, um, very different and kind?
Are they long-term contracting models?
What, what is going on in that space that we need
to improve here?
Yeah, so when I looked at those models, I was looking at
what approach do they take?
Yes. So what are the steps?
So they generally actually follow the five steps. Yeah.
Sometimes they've, um, they might make some
of those steps into kind of seven or eight.
Yeah. And they draw it as a circle. 'cause they, yeah.
So it's, so the approach is very similar.
One of the things, um, they do look at is, uh,
thinking about the length of contracts,
and it will be one of the things that we will need
to be carefully considering in our
contract rotation process.
Yes. Um, because we generally do two
to three year contracts, um,
and, you know, some
of our services we could possibly think about longer term.
Um, yeah. Just from experience when you
Look at relational contracts where you're dealing
with a building, an organization that can move numbly.
Yeah. So their contracts are quite often based,
are much more on outcomes.
And what are the outcomes you're trying to achieve
that are generally are 20 year, you know, 10 to 20 years?
Yeah. The outcomes we have are quite often five.
So we need to make sure that we are developing contracts
that are based on outcomes
and that we have performance measures in place
that demonstrate in year one to five
how they're contributing to this outcome.
That is a 20 year kind of look outlook. Okay.
So, and our colleagues at the social investment agency are
considering how to do that too.
So we're gonna be working closely with them on how to, um,
Yeah. Gotcha. We're
all rebooting. Yeah. Thank you.
Is that my turn, Jason? Sorry, we had one more from,
I'm just trying to check whether was a supplementary
or primary, but, um, look, um, got one more supplementary,
Uh, supplementary. So
just looking at that five step program
and wanting it to be as successful it can be,
will every service to be decommissioned
or restructured now require
a documented child impact assessment, which
we showed up in the OAG that tamari were not take,
were not taken into consideration with the decommissioning
and restructuring in the, in the last, um, financial year.
And if not, how will ensure TAM
are not negatively affected?
Yeah, I mean, that is what they've identified.
I'm yet to work out how we might do that.
Um, I think the things that we're gonna need to think
through is we have at times
a limited bucket of money.
And in a region they'll identify
that these are the top five priorities
for needs more complex, are quite often is actually coming
to the top more, uh, intense, uh, services.
And we'll have a range of services that are being delivered
that though aren't delivering to the five key needs.
They'll still be having an impact.
So we are gonna have to work through with that partner
or provider and the regions about what happens
with those TAM and au um,
what happens with them, um, that we've been servicing.
Is it transferring them into another service?
You know, is it working with another agency?
I'm not sure that is yet to be done. So I, I, last one.
Okay. Thank you so much. So, um,
you've talked about the changes that you've made
to the regional voices
and how they're gonna be incorporated into
the final decision making.
Will regional advice be formally recorded
and published as part of the assessment process
to go into that transparency that we are all wanting
and asking for?
Yeah, I mean, I don't actually have any issue
with our region's advice being, um, um,
we call it published.
Yeah. I mean, I've seen, uh, some of their advice.
I mean, the key things is making sure
that we have the same decision making criteria so that when,
you know, so I've just been recently very clear,
this is the, you know, some of the principles
and decision making criteria.
I'd like you to utilize them.
We've had sessions with our regional staff about how
to apply those decision making criteria.
And then just making sure that when it comes back
and I'm looking at it
and moderating it,
that I'm using the same decision making criteria
and then having conversations with them about,
I know you said apples,
I'm thinking it's more an orange for these reasons.
Can you see how I got there? Thank you.
Um, excuse me. Sorry.
Um, I, I think that my suppers off the,
the questioning lines from Helen and from coding,
and it's, um, Andrew, it's actually just
as a quick reflection.
Back in the back in the day when high trust was like a real
common phrase that was thrown around,
particularly in agencies, you know,
we're gonna approach provider relationships
with a real high trust.
The issue that always revealed itself was that,
that assume trustworthiness on the, and, and,
and that's, and in my view, um,
here we are in a situation which now you, uh, you
and your team are trying to, what is actually, it, it,
it's not as simple, I don't think.
I mean, you sort of like a fresh new program
and a fresh new, it's a reconciliation idea
to reconcile with people that are, and I,
and I recognize the, the letters and the conversations,
but it's still a reconciliation process of providers inside
of a reconciliation, um, uh,
1840 reconciliation program.
Right? So then my questions are,
if you've got a decision making framework,
and I'm just now coming to you vania, where in it is,
are there UNA centered decision concepts?
And when will, you know, you've got there?
'cause if you're talking about outcomes
and you're talking about outcomes from una,
the decision making has to recognize UNA centered.
Yeah. Um, do you remember too veia
and do you would remembered, you know,
it was child centered back in the strengths based families
days, blah, blah, blah, right?
Mm-hmm. So I'm saying MO centered. Yeah. Right.
TI based MO centered frameworks does this
with all, with all the work
that I can see is being put into it.
Does this understand it fundamentally
and recognize that they are not the same as any other
UNA or una Fantastic, by the way,
but I'm talking about Una Maori particularly.
How does the framework understand those things?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, yet again, another long question.
My apologies.
Yeah. I mean, um, when I think about the ecosystem,
the ecosystem of, um, what we do
actually has at the center, Tam, Tahi
and AU that come to our attention.
Some might say that actually it should be broader.
That it should be, but it,
it's not we're we are concerned about the, the 60,000
that come to our attention and,
and the 4,600, 300, um,
that are in our care.
So that has to be, um, at the heart
of our decision making about what their needs are,
and are we investing in services that will, um,
look at those needs and hopefully, you know, improve, um,
their life outcomes.
That's what we need to be centered on.
Um, and yeah, we've just got, um,
some way to go and making sure that that is at the center
and that we are being really clear
and transparent about what that is.
Um, and this process kind of over the next year
or so is about, um, coming,
but it's, it is about working out how we are clear around
what that framework is and,
and how it can be operationalized.
Well, Jean, new question. Yes, thank you.
Um, oh, now I'm torn about which angles go down.
Yeah. Uh, I'll start with,
um Hmm.
Can I ask one supplementary and then go to my primary?
Go for it. Go for it. Thank you.
That's a better way of deal with it.
Uh, in response to the questions that you've already had,
you described, um, how you operate
with at times a limited bucket.
Mm-hmm. And therefore you have to
be constantly reviewing your, um, commissioning
the services and so on.
I suppose, uh, one of our concerns is that as a result of
a 6.5% savings exercise,
the organization needed to cut $30 million of community
providers contracts annually to meet that.
Um, how,
how is the need not being met as a result of having
to recontract and decommission and so on, recorded
and communicated back to the minister, back
to the minister of finance?
So you are doing what you've been asked to be, um, done, uh,
but when decisions are being made,
and we hear that it doesn't appear
that those making decisions knew
that impact it would have on children.
And I hear what you're saying about the 4,300 in care
and the 60,000,
and I think a lot of us were concerned, um, about the impact
that it's going to have on providing
to those particular groups.
So we're not talking about all children about those ones.
Um, and particular, so how is that still captured
from all of your engagements
and communicated back to the minister so
that she can go in, um,
and bid for further funding, not just accepting that
the bucket is limited
and in fact it's gonna be reduced even further
because we were told greater efficiencies,
wasteful spending, low value programs, all sorts
of words like that were used cash cow and so on.
So legitimate need not being able to be met
by the current fiscal Yeah. Bucket.
I mean, I, I'm going through that process now, which is
4 26 27,
and trying to make sure that I've got all the data
that I need in order to undertake a needs assessment.
And I'm actually talking about the future
because I haven't done it yet, is I mention
that we will have comprehensive reporting to the minister on
what the regions, each of the regions.
So we in have eight regions.
So I'll be saying region one says, looking like this
data has changed or it hasn't changed.
Um, uh, these are the services that are being currently
provided in that region.
Um, and, uh, um, they're categorized this way
and, uh, we think actually it's okay.
Or we might be saying actually, um, we
think based on these needs that have changed over time,
we need to, um, change some of the services
and repurpose them or decommission them.
And we're gonna talk about the, what that means, you know,
for those, uh, tamari RAN
and AU who've been accessing those services.
So I expect to see quite a comprehensive kind
of report going to the minister.
And I imagine, um, you know, at some stage, you know,
that will need to be published,
we being, you know, transparent.
Um, I think we'll also need to, um, in any cycle,
you want to be making sure that, you know,
utilization rates are where they are
and if they're not, why, I know I've talked
to a few providers in regions, um,
that I visited already
and they were like, oh, my service is not
being, um, utilized.
So I was like, regional commissioner
and regional advisor, can you come here?
Can you tell them why it's not being utilized please?
Um, and yeah, they called it all directly, which, um,
was, um, you know, you provide services
for this particular cohort.
Actually the cohort we're getting is not that cohort.
That's why they're going over here.
So it's like, cool, we need to explain
that folks, you know, more.
So I just think it's all about us being much more clearer.
I think we haven't been to date,
and I think there's just room for improvement on how
we report and make sure we've got relevant information
and then we're sharing,
Which, yeah, I think my concern is making sure
that we are capturing the need, not just what we were able
to contract for, because that's
what the bucket was. Oh yeah.
No, no, we, we are absolutely gonna be, um,
actively trying to capture the need.
Yeah. Not just the bucket. Thank you.
And, and if that means also that we're like this region,
it needs $10 more of services, then,
you know, we'll be putting up that advice.
Um, so on my new line of, um, questioning,
I know in slide uh, two you talk about, um,
working in collaboration with the social investment agency
to report to cabinet.
Um, bullet point or C says any programs
or services that may transition
to the social investment agency.
What, um, can you please explain what
that, have you been given any direction to find services
to be transferred to the social investment agency?
Is there any criteria on those ones which would be deemed,
um, appropriate to be transitioned
to the social investment agency timeframes,
who will have the relationships, um,
where does the responsibility all that sit?
Um, and I just do want to note on page three,
there's a little diagram there that talks about contracting
for outputs where it currently is commissioning for outcomes
and then social investment approach, which is we want all
of our contracts here.
How many of them will sit with the,
with the social investment agency?
Yeah. I can't answer that with any specificity
because right now we're thinking about that
and working with SIA about what that is.
Um, yeah, so, um,
it is a piece of work that is currently underway,
is how I would describe it.
We're yet to provide advice to ministers that, uh,
the social investment minister
and the Minister for Children
about what that might look like.
So the things that you've identified around principles
for decision making, um,
identifying if there are programs that meet
that decision making criteria that fit within
that category, or what does that mean?
Um, the process for that, which is, um, you know,
obviously talking to the provider
and partner, thinking about timeframes,
thinking about impacts, what does it mean
for statutory decision making?
You know, all of those things have to be thought through.
Um, you know, over the next little while.
Supplementary to that one.
Um, I suppose my concern is that we had a decision to,
uh, continue
or extend funding until the end of the year kind
of coinciding for when the social investment agency will
also be up and running.
I think what I thought, um, at the time is,
is this simply going
to be taken from orang tamari's responsibility
to the Social Investment Agency?
Uh, we've got a very helpful report from the auditor general
in front of us here, which you as orang are taking steps
to address that if services
and it feels like services are anticipated to go,
there are whole lot yet to be determined.
How do we ensure that that agency is going
to address the problems
that have been identified in the Auditor general's report
and that we are actually whoever's going to be doing it,
the commissioning of these services is, uh,
taking the recommendations and the lessons from that report
and improving the process, uh,
for the community providers on the other side
of all of this.
Um, but most importantly, children in their,
Um, perhaps I can, um, you know,
as be has said, you know, there's still a lot of work to do,
you know, working with SIA
and SII doing a lot of work in terms of what,
uh, services they're looking at.
Um, but I think it would be very, very safe to say that, um,
the issues and the best practice identified in the OAG
report would undoubtedly be part of any, uh,
agency that is gonna be providing, um, services.
So whether that's SIA or NSD or, or whoever.
So I, I, you know, I think any sort of transfer
of specific services would be subject
to the best practice we are trying to put in place
and the recommendations of the OAG.
Yeah, we don't want anything dropping in between.
So I think for my purposes, um, I appreciate
that you say there's still a whole lot more work that needs
to be done, um, around the decision making for that,
but somebody somewhere must be thinking that what
has currently been doing
and historically been doing could be better done by
the social investment agency.
What, which part?
Yeah. Well, I mean,
I think like why are they even in the conversation? Yeah.
I Mean, or potentially moving services
to them. That's what I'm worried about. So, so this
Is a conversation that's happening across the government
social sector agencies.
It's not just a ARI thing.
Are they government agencies that also subject
to these considerations too?
The social investment agency
and it's outlined, um, in a cabinet paper that is public,
um, is uh, looking at how they can consolidate contracts,
um, uh, across the government for providers.
And they're also thinking about those services
and programs that have a broader set of outcomes
that have been trying to achieve that require multiple
agencies, you know, to invest in
and having kind of one vehicle, one contract around that.
So that's, that's been publicly announced by, you know,
minister Willis and something that we are supportive of,
you know, from a, um, from that perspective.
So, um, yeah, there's still lots
of room, um,
and things to be developed, um, on that proposal
because it is literally policy under development.
Uh, so I suppose my last supplementary on that is,
I think the concern that I have is potentially
what has happened in the last contracting round
and this damning report could be justification
for taking from the money
and the responsibility for commissioning these services
to the social investment agency.
A brand new agency which doesn't have any relationships,
doesn't necessarily have any knowledge
and capability in this space, um,
that sits within Orang Tamari.
Mm-hmm. So I hear what you're saying about
where there's some where multiple agencies will achieve
that outcome, but Ang Tamari has some very specific mm-hmm.
Um, commissioning that it
Does. Yeah, absolutely. Yeah.
What confidence can we have
that this isn't just gonna be taken from here and
Put over to?
Yeah, I mean, I think it's very clear
that there are certain things that we invest in
that are actually about ensuring
that we implement our statutory responsibilities
and you can't, you know,
transfer statutory responsibilities from one agency
to another easily.
And it's the responsibility of the chief executive
to make sure that, um, we have, um,
processes systems,
and we're investing in those, you know, 4,300 children
that are in our care
and then that we've got, that we're investing in the 60,000.
And if they're statutory responsibilities, I think that
possibly is something that we will be saying, well,
that's something that's under the ARI Act
or part one of the Children's Act
that actually at this stage only
can undertake another agency can't.
So there's a range of our services, if you think about,
you know, our eight categories where it's very clear
or will need to be undertaken that
because of our statutory
responsibilities. Any question, Laura?
Oh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, Anthony, for your response
and regards to these reports, I really appreciate the detail
that you've gone for behind, um, how
to make the improvements.
Um, my question's really about the future
and about open competitiveness in the market
testing of the contracts.
Um, inevitably some contracts will be lost
and they need a change and there will
be a disruption period.
I think we need to acknowledge that because that's
what will actually happen.
Yeah. Um, so while we do want some
of these long-term contracts that we make sure that we,
you know, give them a chance to get the outcomes required,
um, what will you do around market testing for value
for money, checking that the providers are still the right
providers, um, potentially looking at like the collaboration
between providers mm-hmm.
To deliver the same service. 'cause sometimes you've got
like lots of service providers doing the same thing.
So, um, what are your, yeah, what are your thoughts around
that and how would, how do you reconcile the fact
that you need sometimes the long-term contract,
but also you need value for money
and there could be another provider that pops up that as a,
um, good provider.
And I guess also will your tenders be public
and will there be like a competitive bidding process in the
future for some of those things?
Yeah, I mean, that's all part of our, um, kind
of refreshing our contract rotation.
Um, so we need to undertake assessment across all
of our services, how we can, um, um,
categorize them and then think about, um, some sort of, uh,
procurement process.
Mm-hmm. There are some instances
where we've procured already
over the last two to three years.
So it'll be looking at those services
that we haven't procured in, you know, five years or so.
Um, and actually probably three to five years,
which is quite a few.
We will need to think very carefully and plan that
because I don't wanna disrupt, um, services being provided.
And it's also gonna take time.
Like you can't just undertake a, um, a procurement process
and then go, you are stopping.
Like there needs to be a transition period.
So that all needs to be really carefully planned
for and communicated.
Mm-hmm. Uh, and uh, we are not there yet,
but, um, I imagine, you know, that we will at some stage
be outlining a procurement plan
and going, this is what we are thinking
and it'll be proposed.
We'll talk to, um, our community of providers about that
and make sure that they're ready for the process
that's about to be initiated.
Okay. Mm-hmm. So it'll include also looking at things like
making sure the, you know, the cost of the services
and you know, those types of things are also
being carefully considered.
Um, just a supplementary on that.
When do you think that process,
or when do you expect to have that process sort of underway
or some of those long term contracts?
Like are we talking six months a year? Like what Yeah.
Yeah. So there's a few
considerations we need to take into account.
First of all, I need to get through the regional engagement.
Mm-hmm. I need to report to cabinet
and kind of August-ish, I need
to do the regional needs assessment
'cause actually that I will underpin things
and then kind of work that out.
So that's kind of nove, that's getting me
to November this year.
Um, at the same stage we need to be kind of working on our,
uh, services and improving how we do things internally.
Part of that will be thinking about
what the procurement plan is looking like in future years.
Mm-hmm. There are certain things I'm gonna need
to think about, um, in terms of timing of procurement, uh,
'cause um, major decisions, it can't be made.
Um, and periods like the election cycle, for example.
So I'm gonna have to carefully plan around how I do this,
but in a way that, um, uh, gives us the time,
uh, to do it comprehensively and thoroughly,
but also in a way that has been communicated
and the kind of the social sector
NGO sector understand what's gonna be happening,
where they can be involved and, and the process from there.
So I can't quite put a handle on their
ear 'cause I haven't worked it out.
Okay. Yeah. But it is totally something that we need
to be working on in the next 12 months,
but when we're doing, doing this,
and then publishing what our thoughts are.
Okay. Yeah. Any question? David?
Thank you, Andrew Amisha.
Um, and Jesse, uh, look, it's probably gonna land with you
Anisha, um, as a evaluation nerd, which I'm sure you are.
Um, we want to know Yeah.
Um, some key things at this level about
how we can make decisions for the future.
Mm-hmm. And for, for you as well, as well
as the clients talking about here.
So it seems to me in that complexity,
you've got sites you need to deal with,
which you're calling regions, you've got providers,
you've got services and programs, and you have clients.
And as you know, when you've confronted with,
as you said yourself, uh, a litany
of process output indicators
and very little outcome indicators,
that provides a problem going into the future.
So that data is absolutely vital,
but as you know, that kind of data, um,
is like a cascade, isn't it?
Like when you're down talking to that provider in
that region with this set of clients mm-hmm.
That's one level of information,
but we don't need to know that.
We need to know how overall mm-hmm.
These regions are performing Yeah.
And what's going on and providers are going,
and the services and the programs are going.
And that adds up to an overall evaluative framework. Mm-hmm.
So I guess that's my question to you,
because we can absolutely get lost in the detail mm-hmm.
In this kind of evaluation framework.
And of course, what we all need here is at that high level
and know that you've actually done the down the below,
the bottom of the triangle, moving right up to the top.
Yeah. So have you thought about how that might be,
and I heard you use the word dashboard.
Yes, please.
Yeah. I mean, that very much is a item
on the list of things that we need to work on.
So I feel like I need to, um, our teams at the regions need
to be working with providers
to make sure we are asking the right questions,
getting the right data
and information, then we need to be bringing that up to kind
of, um, service line, you know, across services.
And then we also need to be doing it by region.
So it's gonna take time. Um, it's kind of like, you know,
the pandemic a won't happen overnight, but it will happen.
It is absolutely one of our goals that we wanna move to,
which is having dashboard reporting by region
and also by service line
or program line that's typical work towards.
And, you know, one of the things is we will be going,
talking to some of our colleagues at other agencies to see
how they've done things and whether we can learn more from
them about how to bring that, um, material together
To that. I I have a, um,
Questions like it's probably fits
as a supplementary really,
and this is, I'm very supportive dashboard concept.
That sounds fantastic. Um,
but what I want, what I'm curious about is
what does good look like?
And this is this, this conversation
around measuring outputs, measuring outcomes.
Mm-hmm. But you are dealing with complex human scenarios
with com obviously, uh,
of often quite complex background issues.
Mm-hmm. Um, and you know, there's,
you say there's 60,000 children, it comes
to your attention across the country.
So that's a lot to keep an eye on.
And then how, how are you gonna sort of, um,
get the good granular data to measure the outcomes,
what good looks like, uh, in a, in a,
an evolving social scenario Yeah.
Or scenarios. And then,
and then step that through from the granular through to,
to that macro Yeah.
Overview.
Great question. I think, um, kind of broadly speaking,
we'll probably be using the IDI wellbeing indicators,
you know, as you know, so they're about health, you know,
um, happiness, you know, those types of things.
And it's about how do we use the data
that we get from providers that is very granular
and contribute to the IDI material.
And that's, you know, I know something
that the social investment agency, uh, keen
as mustard to be working on.
And I'm kind of keen as mustard to how do we kind
of connect the two and make sure we've got the right
performance measures in place that can demonstrate Oh, okay.
What this is showing is that our,
our TAM are more happier in this region as a result
of these services that they're, you know, they're getting,
that's where I'd like to be going.
Oh. And, and oh, sorry.
What, what? I was gonna say, um, I mean,
I think the IDI data is a really good point.
Um, but the other area I think is just,
I think we've gotta keep on coming back
to just the very kind of practical
or, you know, almost slightly visceral, which is, you know,
ideally we want families supported to look
after their, their taki.
Sure. Um, we don't want children in our care. Mm.
That's, that's, that's not the game at all.
So when they come into our care, those, we want the tamari
to go back to their family as soon as possible.
And that involves supporting the family. Mm.
Uh, to, for the tamari.
And then what, by the time the tamari leaves, you know, 18
or whatever, uh, into, into adulthood, um,
you want, you want to ensure that they are
as minimally dependent on kind of support, uh,
as, as as possible.
Because, you know, they're there to, they're on their own.
They can flourish, you know,
they have the needs of normal kids.
Um, but they haven't got this sort of almost egregious,
massive of dependency
because their needs haven't been addressed a lot earlier.
So I think we've gotta keep on keeping that frame.
Um, but I think the critical thing to me is atang,
tamari should never ever be the end goal.
You know, we, we want to, we want to have a system
where they don't come into our care.
That, that, that's the, that's the big goal.
Look, I, I completely support that, uh, that,
and I think probably everyone would actually is
ideally wouldn't be needed.
Yep. And, and people would be safe,
well supported in their families and their communities.
So, totally Just one, one thing on, on trying to get to
that is, um, I know Tam across governments is trying
to devolve more services into the community.
With that comes the need to capture that information to, to
what outcomes are being achieved,
what good looks like for those organizations.
And then how that information's feedback through, uh,
to decision makers, both at the gran at, again,
sort the, the organization level.
Yeah. Um, uh, the contracting process through to,
through to, you know, the, the, um, parliamentary process.
Uh, but with that, does the time required
to capture the information,
to record the information adequately
and to feed that back through in a, in a meaningful way,
is any work being done
or being considered to be done using the new technologies
that are increasingly available to make it easier to capture
and surface that information for all?
Yeah, I mean, I think, um, uh, we're certainly on
that journey of, you know, de evolution, um,
and, um, you know, looking at the services we provide
and what can be provided in the community, um,
I don't quite, I dunno if I've got the answer
in terms of the technology.
I mean, there's huge kind of opportunities there.
Yeah. Around it. We, we've just recently, um, um,
we're currently trialing a new app.
So as statuary care providers,
we've got about 48 across them
or two, we've designed a particular app around reporting.
Um, and we're trialing that just to see whether
that is more efficient, you know, so that, um,
and the feedback today, a GC has been quite positive
about the online, um, I think it's called on, on
Online self assessment talk.
Yeah. I mean, for, for, that's
for care providers specifically
to make sure they're adhering
to the national care standards.
So yeah, we're looking for any opportunity to use technology
to streamline reporting and insights.
Um, but it is quite a journey just
because of the over 700 services Isha spoke about earlier,
and trying to really rationalize
that into the eight key service areas
and what are the most appropriate outcomes
we choose for each area.
Mm-hmm. And I think that could be a journey over time,
and certainly will be looking to utilize any technology
to help both the providers to make their lives, uh, easier,
um, and less administratively burdensome, um,
but also ourselves as well.
'cause obviously it's very hard without sort of working
around each regional site
or person who holds the provider relationship at the moment
to know exactly what's going on.
Um, Joseph, we, we obviously we're at time, aren't
We? No, no. We've got a little more
time, but no, um,
Thank You. You thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Um, it's a sup off probably a couple of questions prior,
Andrew, but, um,
and, um, I'm not raising the, you know, the trust
and confidence piece of this just to, I'm not raising it
to be, um, unkind.
I'm raising it less, we forget, but there, but,
but, um, if a provider was
to get a similar report, like what,
what OT have received in, in each of those instances,
they would've been shut down by now.
They would literally just be, okay, okay, you are gone.
There is no way you can carry on.
So what we have here in, in my view, is the scenario where,
you know, when you've got the powers
and using the powers for good,
you can just keep going whether you've failed or not.
So, so recognizing those are the facts of the matter
that all providers see.
It's in plain, plain daylight going sharks, you can receive
that report and you are judging me onto whether I've got
surpluses, whether they're a cash cow, so on and so on.
I'm, I'm, I'm, I wanna make these points
because in a reconciliation process, which is
what you're in, if, if, if it's,
if those things are appreciated
or my points are appreciated, then, then how do you,
how do you manage that kind of conversation?
How do you, how do you project, uh, to providers, you know,
small, medium and large.
We particularly, I mean, I'm familiar
with the whanau water work through an iwi provider capacity.
They, they're big hitters.
They know the stuff, they've got the data.
They don't have to go anywhere else to get it.
They've already got it.
Um, how do you, how do you bring that look where,
yeah, how, how do you, how do you project better
and truer and trustworthiness?
How, how do you do that? And what does the capacity
around you, not just who's at the table today,
but in, on every level in your system,
that actually reflects exactly what's been
provided to us today at, at, um, at your table.
Tha Thank you, Andrew.
Um, look, thanks very much.
Perhaps if I, um, answer that in a,
in a kind of a, in steps.
So look, firstly, we, as I said, we've, we acknowledge the,
the, the report, um, and the findings of that report.
Uh, and in the first instance, we went out to providers, um,
and talked to 'em about the report through Hui, um, online,
um, and face to, you know, various face-to-face meetings.
And in that, as I said, we had a two stage process.
One, acknowledging what had happened,
acknowledging the hurt, acknowledging the frustration, um,
um, and, you know, often opportunities
for them to talk as well.
So, um, so that's the first thing.
The second thing in terms of your sort of concept
of reconciliation is, uh, the bottom line is
we, we've just got to be ruthlessly
consistent to purpose and implementation.
So, so it is just, and I'll come to the third point,
but it is just, um, day in, day out,
um, doing the boring stuff really well.
And to be frank, being as boring as possible
to just deliver, you know, we've got a plan, we're going
through these hui, we're getting feedback from the plan.
Um, it's gonna be pretty hard grind,
but we've just gotta key at it, key atd, key, ATD it,
and not be distracted.
And, you know, if I look at the broader, you know,
your question about, you know, who's beyond the table and,
and, and at overall, you know, when, um,
you know, I suppose one
of my initial thoughts when arriving at his acting in in
mid-September was at Tamari has huge expectations
and there's a lot on, and Christ has happened,
and we get moved around quite a bit, was to say to the team,
what is, what is core?
What do we have to do? And let's focus on that.
So we developed this plan, it was sort of 21 items,
and it was just let relentlessly focus on that.
So things like social worker visits, um, it's,
it's care support, it's all of those,
it's all of those sort of things.
And just being very, very clear. Let's, let's be consistent.
Let's monitor it. Um, we've got dashboards for it.
Let's do everything else, right?
Let's do our finances, right? Let's do our hr. Right?
You know, things like what's our turnover?
Um, and if we've got a problem with turnover,
how do we manage that turnover?
Um, are we, are we forecasting right with our budget?
If we are not, if we are overspending
or underspending, how do we manage that properly?
If we've got funding for projects,
are we managing those properly?
So all of those core things,
and I think that will make a huge difference as well.
What, what we need is to be incredibly orthodox, um,
have good systems, good processes,
and just be relentless to that.
And then when the crises happen,
which historically they do happen in all childcare
and protection agencies around the world,
we've gotta understand quickly how that happened.
Um, but we've gotta still keep on focused on that plan
because the plan reduces,
hopefully the opportunities for further crises.
And, and sorry, just, just to, I think when the,
when the public, and in particular in this area,
when the providers see that relentlessness,
you know, it'll make a difference.
You know, every six months will make a difference.
But, but, but we've gotta, we've gotta keep focused
and when things go wrong, we've gotta be quick
to to own up to it.
Thank you, Andrew. Um, your question? Go
Ahead. Thank you.
Uh, so shifting to something
that we haven't spoken about yet, which is, um,
around T partners.
So the auditor general found, and this is on page 53
and I quote, we also did not see ang its relationships
into its decision making
or how it engaged with Kapa, Maori iwi
and HAKU providers end quote in the 24 25 contracting round.
And that this failure seriously damaged trust
with Maori providers s new commissioning
and investment plan, which we've gone through today,
sets up a high level five step cycle,
but is completely silent on upholding to TGI
or implementing recommendation four.
Where in the commissioning
and investment cycle does Ang embed TE
based power sharing, such as co-design, joint sign off,
or delegated authority for Copa Maori providers?
For example, like had the CE, um,
responsibilities similar to Bernardos?
I think it will be dependent on the services
and programs to be delivered more broadly.
But if I take a step back, um,
when I developed this proposed plan,
our strategic iwi partners were the first
we talked to great.
Um, and Andrew and I,
and Darren, you know, attended a hui, we presented the plan,
we sought their feedback,
and um, they were, I can speak on their behalf, supportive,
um, but they saw this program of work being complimentary
to the work that Darren is also leading around devolution
and decentralization.
So when we talk about commissioning
and investment from a devolution
and decentralization concept, I am the end,
I'm the mechanical contractor.
Darren is working with ii, um, um,
and, uh, to develop a way of working,
operating, uh,
devolving particular services, decentralizing.
And then I'm the one who goes, okay, and that's $10
and here's the contract.
'cause they've already designed it.
I'm just literally doing the,
what I call the mechanical parts.
So that's how it kind of broadly fits in.
It is, broadly speaking, a separate process
around decentralization
and devolution in my 554 providers.
Some of those are ii, some
of those are strategic partner, so they wear both heads.
Some of them are providers of services, some
of them are II partners where we've got prototypes underway.
Um, and, uh, they've been very actively involved,
um, in our hui to date, uh, kind of meeting with them.
I think the key thing is
just about us being really clear about
what hat we are wearing.
So am I talking to them with a commissioning
and investment kind of lens, or am I talking to them,
or am I saying, oh, you need to talk
to Darren about decentralizing, you know,
or devolving that particular
service that you're thinking about.
And I will do the mechanics once you've,
you know, kind of done that.
That makes sense. Thank you. Can I have a second? Yeah.
I just pick up, it's kind of, um, uh, with the kind
of the devolving and,
and the devolution, um, you know, we are working
with a number of EV on it, uh, on, on, on that.
And we are ambitious for that.
So, you know, your example around, you know,
delegating decision making, we, I mean,
there's obviously a process to go through
because of statutory requirements, et cetera,
but, um, we are very ambitious for that.
So we don't see it as a threat. We see it as an opportunity.
Mm-hmm. Um,
and, um, you know, at the end of the day, if,
if there's an iwi that's got my, um, uh,
statutory decision making
and I've devolved it, I'm, I'm, you know,
you've got the processes and the
principles, I'm fine with that.
You know, it's, it's, it's no more, you know,
some people say, well, is that risky?
And I'm, I'm saying, no, no, it's, it's probably less risky
'cause they're on the community, they know the families.
Mm-hmm. You know, so I don't, we are not an organization
that feels we have to hold it in Wellington.
Mm. In fact, sometimes it's a lot more
dangerous holding it in Wellington.
But it, but it's, but it's how you go through it
and it's the checks and balances.
Thank you. Mm. So going on from that, that's wonderful
to hear because, um, COR
and I, they, you know, have the sea responsibility
and then we wanna make sure that they're successful,
but they were cut funding,
I can't remember the exact amounts.
I'm like a million dollars overnight
and without warning as part of this 6.5%
budget exercise.
Um, so how do we ensure that those Titi partners
who have been divulged this decision making part like power
similar to, um, the seas to yourself
actually are successful when they can have funding cut
overnight without explanation?
Well, I think, you know, the process, the process
that we're going through is, uh, you know,
that whole process about what are the services
that we would look at in discussing, discussing
with the iwi, um, uh,
or even a community group, um, what is the capability?
How do we help build capability? Mm-hmm.
Um, perhaps in the long run there's
about transfer of capability.
I mean, you know, there are li there are not enough social
workers in New Zealand, so, you know, um, uh,
um, you know, you would look at how you could, you know,
perhaps transfer social workers or partner
or whatever as an example.
Um, and then when it comes to sort of the funding, um,
it's a, it's a good call.
I mean, I mean a good question. You know,
there is no such thing as funding certainty forever,
but how do you manage in a way that is predictable,
predictive or predictable?
Uh, and most importantly, I think manageable,
which is your issue about, you know, short notice,
substantive funding, whatever.
And that, that's what I think we would, you know,
we would obviously have to work through.
That's fantastic. Just, yeah,
because, um, just moving into Bernardos as well,
who has the same CE powers, they're part of
that six month extension from when the mm-hmm.
Minister moved into operations
of Wang Tam put this pause on.
But what we've seen in the budget is
that is there is a fiscal cliff after that.
There is no budgeting for that six month extension.
So I'm wondering how we can ensure
that funding, um, stability
isn't actually funding left for Bernards.
Um, who has these other sort of similar, um,
so probably the first thing I would say is that, um,
there is about, so I said 194 providers
that we extended contracts for.
Of those a hundred ninety four, forty nine, yeah,
49 were actually extended by 12 months.
So anyone providing statutory care services.
And what was the last, um, the
Permanent Caregiver support service?
Oh yeah. Um, we looked internally to see
what we could afford, and we did them by 12
because they provide really core services that we were like,
we needed to give them as much certainty as possible.
Um, so that's probably the first thing I would say.
Um, the second thing is, um,
we have a whole range of statutory responsibilities
that are broader than just kind of the care things
that we need to be making sure that we are funding.
And while, um, I think we've got our CFO here,
we actually do have funding across, you know, our vote.
Um, the key thing will be identifying whether we need
additional funding Yeah.
On top of what our current vote is. Yeah.
And right now, I think if we were
to keep services as they are, we are fine.
Mm-hmm.
Type of one last relatively quick question.
Yes. I did say it was just, uh, one, um,
I'm just interested because I did hear this from visiting,
um, providers, um, has Orga TAM delivered pay equity funding
to eligible providers, um, either
through the change in the contracts, the extension
of the contracts, or as a grant?
And if not, why not?
I'm gonna hit Jesse to probably respond,
but what I would say generally is yes,
but there is, um, yeah. You, you said
Yes. Uh,
yes we have. Um, so we delivered, uh,
obviously the legal settlement for the five original
entities that saw the pay equity settlement
through the formal, uh, process.
Um, and then there was the pay equity extension where, uh,
providers were given pay equity funding based on assessment
conducted by the Public Service Commission.
Um, that was transferred to us subsequently.
Um, what we've been
through this year is a baselining exercise to try
and build pay equity into the actual rates
of those contracts.
Um, so it's a shift away from grants
'cause we actually want the rates
and the contracts to be equitable going forward.
Um, we have hit some issues with this
and that, you know, that does require,
when you're talking about providers on mass, um,
we do do a bit of a benchmarking exercise
and some providers have come to us
and notified us that they don't think
that their pay equity
entitlement has been properly assessed.
Where that occurs, uh, we are dealing, um,
with those issues on a case by case basis to try
and work out why there might be discrepancies in the pay
equity funding between financial years.
Well, thank, thank you very much. We, we are, um,
now over time, look, thank you very much for coming.
Um, and speaking to the committee today, I think you also,
for the work that you do for, um, our, our children
and communities across the country,
it's very challenging work, very important work, uh,
support your call, uh, to ideally in,
in the future we would not need, um, to these services,
but in the interim, we, we really do.
Mm-hmm. And, uh, kinda support the boring work to,
to those fundamental things that provides
that predictability and, uh, going get some courage.
Any, any more work to be done on, on just the definition
of what good looks like.
Yeah. So it's really clear what everyone needs aim for.
Thank you very much. Thank you very
Much. Thanks.
Much Thank.